# DIF-Statistical-Inference-and-Detection-without-Knowing-Anchoring-Items

## Description
Many DIF analyses require to know several anchor items that are DIF-free and then draw inference on whether each of the rest is a DIF item, where the anchor items are used to calibrate the latent trait distributions. When no prior information on anchor items is available or some anchor items are misspecified, item purification methods and regularized estimation methods can be used. The former iteratively purifies the anchor set by a stepwise model selection procedure and the later selects the DIF-free items by a LASSO-type regularization approach. Unfortunately, unlike the methods based on a correctly specified anchor set, these methods are not guaranteed to provide valid statistical inference (e.g., confidence intervals and $p$-values). In this paper, we propose a new method for DIF analysis under a  multiple indicators and multiple causes (MIMIC) model for DIF. This method adopts a minimal $L_1$ norm condition for identifying the latent trait distributions.
It can not only accurately estimate the DIF effects of individual items without requiring prior knowledge about an anchor set, but also draw valid statistical inference, which yields accurate detection of DIF items. The inference results further allow us to control the type-I error for DIF detection. We conduct simulation studies to evaluate the performance of the proposed method and compare it with the anchor-set-based likelihood ratio test approach and the LASSO approach. The proposed method is further applied to analyzing the three personality scales of Eysenck personality questionnaire - revised (EPQ-R). For more details, please refer to our paper at https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.11112.pdf.


## Usage
Functions.R file contains code for all functions used in the simulation studies and the real data application. In particular, we adopt EM algorithm with Gaussian quadrature for marginal log-likelihood estimation for model training. 
Simulation Studies.R contains code used for simulation studies in the paper. Coverage_Plot.R contains code for evaluating the coverage rate of our proposed inference method and the LRT method. 
Real Data Application.R contains code for real data application to the EPQ-R data set. The EPQ-R has three scales that measure the Psychoticism (P), Neuroticism (N) andExtraversion (E) personality traits, respectively. We analyze the long forms of the three personality scales that consist of 32, 24, and 23 items, respectively. Each item has binary responses of “yes” and “no” that are indicated by 1 and 0, respectively. This analysis is based on data of an EPQ-R study collected from 1432 participants in the United Kingdom. Among these participants, 823 are females and 609 are males. We perform DIF detection and statistical inference for items in each of the three scales separately. For more details, please refer to our paper at https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.11112.pdf.
